Application of Sorting-VI: Maximum Overlapping Intervals

PSEUDOCODE

Algorithm MaximumOverlapIntervals(S)
Input: n intervals (li, ri)
Output: Maximum number of overlapping intervals and points where this maximum occurs

1. Create an event for every left endpoint:
      (li, +1)
2. Create an event for every right endpoint:
      (ri, -1)
3. Sort all 2n events by their point.
   If two events have the same point, process a start event before an end event.
4. Set current = 0 and maximum = 0.
5. Scan all sorted events:
      current = current + event.type
      if current > maximum:
          maximum = current
6. Scan the sorted events again:
      update current using event.type
      whenever current == maximum, record that point.
7. Display maximum and all recorded points.
8. Stop.

WORKING OF THE PROGRAM

The program uses a sweep-line technique.

For every interval (l, r), two events are created:
- l with type +1, representing a person/interval entering.
- r with type -1, representing a person/interval leaving.

All 2n events are then sorted according to their positions on the line. Since an endpoint is considered part of its interval, if a starting and ending event occur at the same point, the starting event is processed first.

After sorting, the program scans the events from left to right. The variable 'current' stores the number of intervals currently active. Whenever an interval starts, current increases by 1; whenever an interval ends, current decreases by 1.

During the first scan, the program finds the largest value reached by 'current'. This is the maximum number of simultaneously overlapping intervals.

During the second scan, the program identifies the points at which this maximum overlap is reached and displays them.

For example, for:
(10,40), (20,60), (50,90), (15,70)

the maximum overlap is 3. Points such as 20 and 50 are points where the maximum overlap is reached.

TIME COMPLEXITY CALCULATION

Suppose there are n intervals.

1. Creating events:
   Each interval produces two events, one start event and one end event.

   Number of events = 2n

   Creating all events takes:
       O(n)

2. Sorting the events:
   The program sorts 2n events using qsort().

   Sorting m elements takes O(m log m), where m = 2n.

       O(2n log(2n))

   Since 2 is a constant:

       O(2n log(2n))
       = O(n(log n + log 2))
       = O(n log n)

3. First scan:
   The program scans all 2n events once to find the maximum overlap.

       O(2n) = O(n)

4. Second scan:
   The program scans all 2n events once again to identify points where the maximum is reached.

       O(2n) = O(n)

5. Total time:

       O(n) + O(n log n) + O(n) + O(n)

       = O(n log n)

Therefore, the worst-case time complexity is:

       O(n log n)

The sorting step dominates the linear scans.

SPACE COMPLEXITY

The program stores 2n events.

Therefore, the auxiliary space required is:

       O(2n) = O(n)

SAMPLE INPUT

Enter number of intervals: 4

Enter intervals (left right):
Interval 1: 10 40
Interval 2: 20 60
Interval 3: 50 90
Interval 4: 15 70

SAMPLE OUTPUT

Maximum number of overlapping intervals: 3
Points where maximum overlap begins:
20 50

CONCLUSION

The program implements the sweep-line algorithm using sorting. By converting every interval into a start and an end event, sorting the events, and scanning them, the maximum number of simultaneously overlapping intervals can be found efficiently. The overall worst-case running time is O(n log n).
